[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think self-esteem
is misunderstood.
I think it has been
defined in so many ways
as the capacity to
speak up in terms
of your personal boundaries.
But that's the rehearsal
for self-esteem.
To esteem the self
means to recognize
what the power of your soul is.
Hi, I'm Carolyn
Myss, and I started
giving medical intuitive
readings in 1983.
So I've been teaching
and traveling
the globe for a long time.
For all of the years that I
have taught about intuition,
and I've seen people do
all kinds of exercises
and all kinds of
meditation tactics,
the truth is, the key
to your self-esteem
is that intuitive clarity
and trust of oneself
are the core ingredients.
The quality of self-esteem
that I'm talking about
sustains your health.
And it's not showy or public.
It's not loud.
It doesn't inspire you
to reach for attention.
In fact, healthy
self-esteem liberates you
from that need to seek
other people's approval.
Healthy self-esteem
helps you to break
from that fear of being
humiliated, that you can rely
on your own integrity
and values to remain
unshakable no matter the
circumstances that you're in.
Because if you cannot trust
yourself, you'll discover,
as I'm sure many of
you already have,
that trusting anybody else, or
anything, is nearly impossible.
Self-esteem is core to your
progressing and creating
truly healthy
relationships, not just with
your friends and your family
and your personal partners,
but with yourself.
Now, we are meant to
develop self-esteem.
But I need to position it in
such a huge tapestry for you
that you get that
self-esteem is not an option.
It's a necessity.
It's a necessity because
of who we are today
and how different we are
from previous generations.
If you would have
talked to someone 30,
40 years ago, they would
think about self-esteem
by the cars we drive,
about how we dress,
about their position in society,
and the power of the armies
we could move.
And while that's
still a part of it,
we've moved into what you
might think of as the quantum
level of power.
Now we talk about power
plays, power relationships,
power boundaries.
How often it is that
someone will say,
in healing, we have to
take our power back.
Or, I feel like I have no
power in this relationship.
Or, I don't have any power
in this business situation.
We define ourselves in
the language of power
for the first time ever--
interior power,
not external power.
It's been such a
subtle transition
into the language of
power that we actually
don't realize that we've
made this transition.
We are the first generation
to add power to self.
There's an entire movement
around self-empowerment.
And inner power
is as illuminating
as it is intimidating, because
becoming empowered changes you
in ways you did not see coming.
We are in a discovery
zone of ourselves in a way
that we have never,
ever been before, ever
in the history of humanity.
That is such a big
sentence to drop on you.
But it's exactly
what is happening.
So let me give you the
three levels of self-esteem.
Survival self-esteem, level one,
refers to inner qualities that
we develop in ourselves through
learning to rely on our own
survival gut instincts--
cleverness, for example, and our
capacity to endure and develop
physical stamina in the world.
Inner self esteem comes
from the refinement
of personal qualities
of character,
such as courage and
integrity, and learning how
to rely on your values in life.
And the third level
of self-esteem
is mystical self-esteem.
That's the capacity to rely
upon your inner spiritual
experiences and
guidance, creating
a harmonious balance between
your interior and exterior
consciousness.
And here's a mystical truth--
the power of who
you become is more
transforming for
others than anything
an ordinary person does.
We're discovering the
power of our nature.
This is such a great,
big, huge, big deal.
It's so huge that it doesn't
even fit in our heads.
This explains so
much why in this era,
we have become hypersensitive.
We think that
everything we say has
to be examined and processed.
And we become hypersensitive
about every word
said to us and everything.
But there's a reason for that.
The reason is because
in a different way,
we have to learn about how
powerful we are, how much power
is packed into
every word we say,
into every thought we have, into
how potent every single choice
we make is, how potent we are.
We are literally in a discovery
zone of a mine, M-I-N-E,
what's mine, and
a mind, M-I-N-D,
a mine and a mindfield of what's
in our mind and what is mine.
And the only way we will
learn to esteem ourself
is to watch others
walk over ourself,
and to feel it, and go
ouch, ouch, ouch, ouch.
You haven't paid
attention to me.
You've-- I heard you say that.
I heard you look at
me the wrong way.
And to hyper-respond to
when someone is walking
over you, a part of you.
And you feel it.
And it's one way--
one way-- that we
will become aware
of what it is to feel
the power of ourselves
when it's out of ourself,
when we have no sense of it.
When we feel someone walking
over the mindfield of us,
a fragment of ourselves, because
they didn't pay attention to us
and we feel that,
they didn't esteem us.
That's how we are beginning
to sense how powerful we are,
and how we utilize
it, how we become
mindful of every word,
of every thought,
of the capacity we have to
help another person by one word
we say, and of the
destructive power we have.
We're learning this
for the first time
at the quantum
level of ourselves,
the microcosm of
our own soul power.
And that's causing this
phenomenal transition
to happen.
We all know that we
start out in a tribe,
so that our sense
of who we are is
formed like clay
from the family,
from the whole
that we grow up in.
We look at the
giants raising us,
and we think, what
will they think?
So to seek the
approval of the tribe
is something that is brought up
in us, and it's inherent in us.
And it is not a bad
thing, because here's
an operative word that
you hold in your heart,
because it's true.
We need to hold ourselves
accountable to ourselves
and to the community
in which we live.
And that is part of self-esteem.
But a great challenge
of our time--
and it is the inevitable
confrontation we all will face
now--
is that all of us are feeling
the awakening of that intuitive
voice in ourselves, that voice
that is speaking to us while we
are a part of the whole,
while we sit with our tribe,
while we sit with
people we love dearly.
I'm going to introduce
a new word to you.
I love this word.
I love it.
I love it, love it, love it.
It's called charism.
Charism-- the word "charisma"
comes from "charism"--
but it means the grace
that only your soul has,
that only your soul has, that
single tone in this universe
by which God knows your
name, your charism,
the mission in your soul.
We are individuating now.
We're popping like
individual souls, longing
to become whole, longing
to sense ourselves.
And when we live in our tribes,
we've been like cologne.
But we are longing to become
perfume, strong bottles
fragrant with our fullest
potential, sacred perfume,
where the smallest
drop of us can
do a great act of transformation
on behalf of the whole.
The whole is the operative word.
I see this transformation as an
archetypal one, a sacred rite
that will help us
refine in ourselves that
quality of self-esteem
we must have
in order for that holy
potential to emerge.
And I mean W-H, and I mean
H-O-L, our whole potential,
our charism, to come through.
It's the type of
self-esteem that
is tested like an initiation.
It's an archetypal initiation.
Each of us is
going to have to be
on a kind of a
battlefield in our lives,
where the test of self-esteem
is that our old values,
we're going to have
to confront them.
And perhaps the
first great obstacle,
the first great confrontation,
is that place between them
versus you.
And how many times
have you received
a sense of inner instruction?
You should do this.
You should do that.
Why don't you say this?
Why don't you act on this?
But you've stopped
because you've
said, what will they say?
I don't know.
What will they say?
I'll give you an example of one.
I will never forget this, never.
This one woman wrote that she
had seen herself as a healer.
Now, this is classic.
We decide we are someone who
can empower another person.
But what we don't recognize
about occupations of power
is that they include a
journey of initiation.
So here is this woman,
and she's running.
She's jogging, and
she sees this woman,
and her dog had just been hit.
She's screaming over the dog.
And she hears a
voice, and the voice
said to go lay your
hands on that dog.
And it doesn't matter that
it was a dog or a child.
It doesn't.
It was her moment for that test.
And instead of her
listening to that voice,
she stood there and
said, oh, what if I fail?
What will they say?
And she failed the test.
Now, this isn't about whether
or not the dog lived or died.
This is about the fact that in
that moment, her fear of being
humiliated, and by
needing an outcome
to be successful in order
for her to feel success,
was greater than her saying,
OK, is that what you want
me to do, and follow through.
The kind of self-esteem
I am talking about
is that you trust the interior,
the unreasonable self-esteem,
the self that says I
am crossing the Rubicon
and trusting the invisible
world where miracles are,
the invisible world where
reason is disconnected from how
the events flow in my
life, so that I can
allow guidance to take over.
And this is the difference
between my fate and my destiny.
Fate is when I allow fear
to decide my outcome.
But destiny is when I will
allow this inner guidance
to decide it.
For example, you have the
opportunity for a new job.
It represents everything
you've prepared for.
But it's hundreds of
miles away from you,
your family of origin,
everything that's familiar,
your tribe.
The fate path makes
choices based on your fears
and what's familiar,
what you think is safe.
It's too much
trouble, you think.
Or maybe you listen to your
tribe's collective fears
about moving away so far.
Either way, you cave.
The destiny path, however, makes
choices based on discovery.
Sure, there's risk.
But there's always the
possibility of growth.
What will I discover
about myself
if I make the choice
to enter something new?
Destiny always
includes discovery,
what you do not
know about yourself,
the unknown, what
you've yet to discover.
When I will trust that, I
don't know what's out there,
but I have this sense
of guidance that says,
go this way.
And other people may
say, are you crazy?
You don't even know
what's out there!
But that's the thing
about your sense of self.
It trusts a reality
greater than yourself.
How do you develop this
kind of self-esteem?
Because I know, if you were
sitting with me right now,
you would say, how
do you go there?
How do you develop this?
And lucky for you,
I'm going to tell you.
You know what?
The first thing
is, pay attention
to how easily you're humiliated.
Pay attention.
And watch how easily, watch how
easily you give your power away
because you're so
afraid of that.
You have to make your
first conscious choice
about paying attention
to what you think
you needed for self-esteem.
So why do I say that a
confrontation with the self,
when it comes to self-esteem, is
inevitable, it's not an option?
It's because your old values are
inevitably going to fail you.
The self-esteem as we
know it is simply not
sufficient to manage
the challenges that
come from developing
intuition, that
come from the quality of
self that we need to develop
to manage our health, and
because quite frankly,
it's an archetypal
transformation.
We literally are becoming
different power machines.
We literally are transitioning
from five-sensory human beings
to multi-sensory.
And the type of way that
we understood self-esteem,
where we developed a
kind of an ego that
allowed us to protect
our home and get a job,
is not the sufficient
kind of self-esteem
that we need to protect
our inner power.
This is a whole
different quality.
And so the battlefield tactics
and basic survival antics
in the world are
not sufficient when
it comes to managing
the power of your soul.
It's just not good enough.
There is no truth in
your personal truth.
Isn't that a big, huge
thing to understand?
Personal truth is,
here's my personal truth,
that I'm totally intimidated--
this is the truth.
I'm personally
intimidated by snakes.
And snakes remind me of all
bad things in the world.
But there is no truth in that.
A truth is something that
applies to everybody,
like the law of gravity.
Everybody falls if you push
them down off a cliff, something
that is universal.
Now, it takes a lot
of esteem in oneself
to recognize that my personal
truth is one level of truth.
But my spiritual path has to
be governed by universal truth.
And the reason it
does is because that's
the level at which my inner
being is creating my reality
to esteem myself so that I
actually begin to understand
that I am co-creating
my reality,
and it's not my personality
that's doing it,
but my inner nature.
Then, in order for me
to really understand
how I'm co-creating my
reality, that I really have
to take charge of my power.
And I need a level
of self-esteem
that is much more sophisticated
than the level of personality.
You have to pay attention
to what your values are,
to how you behave, to what your
habits are, to how you respond
when you're angry,
to how you respond
to people in relationships.
And that is a tremendous test
of how you esteem yourself,
how you interpret
what someone says
to you, how you treat others.
Let's talk about strategies
for developing self-esteem,
true self-esteem.
When I think about how to
develop a sense of self,
one of the things I would
tell you is pay attention.
You have to first observe
yourself in action.
You have to observe how
you lose power in order
to redefine power for yourself.
Pay attention to how much
of your time and energy
is spent looking for
other people's approval,
how much of your day is
spent around planning
and hoping other people
will see you or notice you,
or wondering what they will say.
Will this person approve of you?
And honestly, take
time to do this.
And then actually calculate,
I spend a whole lot of my time
looking for other
people's approval
or making my decisions
on whether or not
someone will approve of me
or approve of my decisions,
and how much of your
choice is based on that.
For example, Rick
discovered that he
had at least 30 thoughts
in one day related
to what his boss
was thinking about,
and whether or not his boss
was thinking about Rick's job.
And Ann calculated that she
spent at least 15 minutes
of each hour wondering
what others were thinking
about of her and whether or not
they were going to text her.
And then there was
Linda, who admitted
that she spent at least
two hours every day
getting ready in the
morning, because she
was so concerned about what
other people would think
about what she was wearing.
If you were to say this--
"What should I do with my life?
What do you want me to
do in this moment?"--
you're going to get an
answer to that prayer.
You're going to get guidance.
Wherever you get guidance,
what is your first instinct?
Is it to dismiss the
guidance because it
feels so frightening to you?
Or is it to wonder,
what will people think?
Do you take your guidance
to the court of others?
Or do you sit with
it in yourself
and think, how am I
going to pull this off?
If you take your inner
life to other people
and give it to them
to pass around,
and then give it back
to you after they've
chewed on it like
a bad steakbone,
then you have no
sense of yourself,
and you're setting yourself
up for the path of fate.
You're tossing yourself to fate.
But if you think, I have to make
this decision based on, what
is my inner self telling me?
Even at times if you
don't have clarity,
one thing you always do have
clarity on-- and you do--
is what you know
you should not do.
What you know you should not
do, you are always clear about.
And if you're not sure
about what you should do,
it's only because you're looking
for assurance of the outcome.
And that is where
your sense of self
is true self-esteem is built.
One risky choice after
another, and that's
how you learn to trust
your inner guidance,
the guidance that
says, go this way.
I won't tell you why,
and I won't show you
the outcome, because you create
the outcome with every choice
in each moment.
There is only now.
The next moment is
created by this moment.
And each unreasonable choice
you make to believe in yourself,
you're changing the outcome
to something more spectacular.
And that's something you have
learned as you trust yourself.
So tune in to the lies
that you tell yourself.
For example, how often have
you said, I'm not unhappy?
Or, I can handle this stress.
It's not that stressful for me.
Or, sugar's not that bad.
I can have a little bit.
Or, just one more glass
of wine won't bother me.
I can take it.
These aren't little lies.
They may feel little.
But they're not.
Think of the consequences.
What's very important
is your capacity
to tell yourself the truth.
That takes a lot of esteem.
And that's how you build
esteem in yet another way.
You learn how to discern the
difference between what's worth
acting out and what isn't, that
it takes a whole lot of esteem
to not respond to a
spectacle that you just
should let pass you by.
So what is a spectacle?
A spectacle is when someone
provokes you into an argument
deliberately, and you
decide not to engage.
Or when someone says something
to you like, they're angry,
and they just explode.
But you realize, they're
not really exploding at me.
They're just angry, and they
would explode at anybody.
And you just let it pass by.
It is just a spectacle,
and it's gone in a moment.
You begin to recognize,
I'm not getting
attached to these things.
It's not worth it.
These are just the
spectacles of life,
that you learn to value
the power in your soul,
that you realize, I'm
not responding to this.
It's not worth my energy.
It's not worth my soul.
It's not worth my
power, that you
begin to make choices in your
life that reflect that you have
a reverence for
yourself, that you
start living the esteem that
you want others to hold you in.
So if you see someone
violating your moral values,
you don't follow the tribe
and participate or just
avert your eyes, as
if that's action.
You actually get up
and leave the table
if someone mistreats a waitress.
Or you speak out and
represent your values
when someone passes a
racial, negative comment
about a group of people, instead
of sitting in cowardly silence,
as if that represents
your values.
So let me give you an exercise,
because this is always
good for you to have
a sense of yourself.
And I tell people
this at workshops.
Write down a list of
all the good things
you've done all your whole
life, your whole life,
all the good things you've done.
And then of course their
eyes roll backwards,
because they can't
possibly remember.
They can't possibly remember.
But I'll say, write down
the five or six times
you've betrayed yourself.
And no one has difficulty
remembering that, nobody.
And here's the point
of that exercise.
Acts we do out of
low self-esteem
stick like barnacles on a ship.
We remember those.
We remember when we
betrayed ourselves,
and we never forget it.
And sometimes, what makes
those acts of self-betrayal
so bitter, in order
to live with it,
we try and find
someone else to blame--
I wouldn't have done this if
it wasn't for you or you--
because it's just so difficult.
But in the end, in the end,
the truth is we're the only
person that made the choice
we did.
Self-esteem is the
only quality we
can develop that has
the grace to give us
the power to stand up and say,
I'll never betray myself again.
I will never lie again.
I won't do it.
I won't betray myself
or another person.
If we don't have that
sense of inner dignity,
do you understand that it's
impossible to heal a disease?
It's impossible.
Think of yourself like
a wood-burning stove.
Without true
self-esteem, you're going
to run around your
life collecting twigs,
looking for compliments,
for all kinds of things,
stuffing this wood-burning
stove with twigs
all the time to keep the
fire burning inside of you.
And twigs burn up like
this, because a compliment
means nothing.
It's nothing.
But when you have true
self-reverence for yourself,
it's like putting a
huge Christmas log.
You don't need everybody else's
enforcement all the time.
It's nice, but
you don't need it.
You don't need it.
And not only that, here's
what the actual blessing is.
You're able to give others
the love they are seeking.
That is so hard for people
without self-esteem.
It is incredibly difficult to
genuinely love another person.
This is a journey worth taking,
no matter how long it takes you
to get there, I promise you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]